---
title: Programming in R Workshop Post-mortem
date: 2018-01-30
layout: post
---

*The workshop outline can be found [here](qmed-computes/programming.html)*

I advertised this workshop as appropriate for anyone to attend, even (and
especially) if they hadn't done any programming before -- I wanted this to be
useful to people who had only ever used functions in Excel, say. My goal here
was to get people familiar with the very idea of typing in commands to an
editor/REPL, and running them to get some result. I also wanted learners to see
RStudio in action, get a feel for what it's like to drive it. 

This session was intended as gentle introduction, to warm people to the very
foundational ideas of "code", syntax, and data. And, because we are moving at
breakneck speed (the next session is on using
[dplyr](http://dplyr.tidyverse.org/) in R for data wrangling, this session was
important for everyone who wanted to come to future sessions to attend. For that
reason, I took a poll on Facebook and selected the 2 times that covered the
greatest number of learners, and ran the workshop twice. 

Now, in addition to newbies, I also know there are several learners with at
least some programming experience, so in the first session I ran, I organized
it as a "choose your own adventure": either start with some very very basic
[Intro R exercises from
DataCamp](https://www.datacamp.com/courses/free-introduction-to-r) if you are a
beginner, or if you have some experience start with Software/Data Carpentry
lessons depending on your learning style. I provided an opinionated guide to
each of these options. 

Bad idea. Everyone chose to start with the DataCamp exercises, and I suspect
that's because it's the *first thing on the of options* and the other options
seem equally good places to start -- that is, I *probably didn't explain the
options very well (or have good reasons)*. In any case, everyone dutifully
hammered away at the DataCamp exercises and by the 1.5h mark it seemed had
exhausted their supply of dopamine, and weren't able to concentrate on the next
parts of the workshop plan. The good thing about doing the DataCamp intro R
lesson exercises first is that they are short, self-contained, and give you
immediate feedback when you solve them. And that's also their downside: it's
monotonous, without much context or application, and can be too much of a good
thing.

The second time I ran the workshop I told learners directly to start with the
DataCamp exercises, but only stay on them for at most 30 minutes before moving
to the Software Carpentry lesson. That way, learners got a feel the
editor/console/REPL process but had enough concentration left to explore RStudio
and sink their teeth into some promising exercises. 


So, takeaways: 
- Be clear about what learners should do, and limit the drill exercises. Perhaps
  in other circumstances (a longer workshop? more experienced learners) the
  Choose Your Own Adventure technique could work, but in a short, 2 hour,
  workshop with beginners it fell flat. 

- Stress having a break. I learned this after the first session, and have
  continued to make a point telling people when an hour is up, and giving them
  permission to take a break. 

- 2 hours is not really enough time to do this well, but I knew that. I tried to
  make it very clear, and will continue to do so, that these workshops, and this
  entire series is only meant show learners what is possible and give them a
  chance to play: not a place to become an expert. 

- Running two sessions of the workshop provided a great opportunity to rethink
  and rework my lesson plan, and it wasn't a heck of a lot more work to do. Some
  people came out for both sessions also.
